Sooo, about a month ago a finished reading Umineko When They Cry and ever since I've been wanting to write something about it.

Even though it's been more than a month since I finished reading it I still think about it every single day on some level.



On a surface level this VN is about a group of rich corporporate wall street fat cats that decides to have a family reunion on a private island they own, little did they know, on this very island will take place a mysterious series of murders.
Since the very beginning of the story you're told about legend of some witch that supposedly lives on this island. 
So the whole thing boils down to this: are these murders the work of a witch using magic or of a human using tricks?

Now, the game isn't really "a game", since it literally plays itself, you really just have to read as the story unfolds without you doing anything... but if you don't want to be just an onlooker and play the VN how you're supposed to (the game will literally break the 4th wall and tell you this), you'll need to take notes and make your own theories, but here's the catch...

The game will throw you evidence, fake evidence and circumstantial evidence to deceive you and throw your mind into disarray. There will be lots of baits and red herrings, and even though at some point you'll start expecting all kind of crazy ploys you WILL still fall for them hook, line and sinker every time. The game knows exactly how smart you are, when you think you finally figured out something important you'll find yourself caught in the witch's puppet-strings (or should I say cob-web? [ahaha.wav]), and every time this happens you'll be forced to readjust all your belied theories and find another angle to approach the riddles. There are so many paths and threads to follow that you just become lost in this labyrinth of wild speculative theories that you built yourself. As the game progresses you start building the layout of the mansions in your mind, wondering if character X could be in Y place at Z time, wondering if the killer works alone or if he's in cahoots with other characters, trying to understand how a corpse was moved in such a short amount of time, looking for a way to untangle this clew of nonsense making use of every little bit of proof you gleaned by reading between the lines in a dialogue.

It may look like an impossible feat (and now that I know what the truth is, it really seems hopeless to me for a new reader to figure it out by himself), but it's not unfair. The game will always give you all the evidence and clues you need in order to unveil the truth. It's technically possible to solve every mystery in the game by yourself, you just need to dive in the jumbled mess of clues and alibis that you're given and find what is really useful (pro tip: basically all of it, in one way or another) and how. By the end of it you'll realize that the answer to the riddles was right in front of you, hidden in plainsight, most of the time.

However, no matter how complex, spectacular and meticulously orchestrated a plot is, if there isn't a good writing to back it up it will fail miserably to deliver.
Luckily Ryukishi knows exactly how to keep the reader filled with anticipation, the way the game builds and releases tension is pure genius, it keeps alternating between happy-go-lucky, meek, funny scenes and absurdly violent, unsettling ones that will literally make you wince. The whole story is a four-way pendulum that continuously swings between hype, horror, sadness and joy. It's not a forgiving novel, almost every time you go soft it will make you rue your naivete', to the point where you'll doubt every good thing that happens, until the very end. 
To support all of this you have a plethora of characters, every single one of them has depth, a backstory and a unique personality which is exposed through both explicit and implicit characterization. Throughout the game you'll learn more and more about every member of the cast and you'll find yourself wavering between love and hate, and sometimes even both at the same time. 